# Case Study - Unhedged: Giving retail investors access to AI and Machine Learning
--- 

## Overview

The average retail investor in their investing journey can come to realise that there are larger forces at play manipulating the markets. Did a stock increase fifteen percent for no apparent reason? Did a stock they have been tracking for weeks suddenly drop as soon as they buy? Or even simpler – where should they invest? These moments can leave retail investors disheartened, upset and unconfident. The reality is, there are large institutional investors that will always be one step ahead. 

In the middle of the 20th century during the early stages of the Information Age, investment banks, venture capital firms, private equity firms and hedge funds understood the importance of data collection. Having access to data early and often meant these institutions could make investment decisions around the data gathered. With the power of coding the man hours, resources and time used to accumulate such data was reduced. Suddenly, computer programmers were working in the same offices as bankers and analysts – finance had a new flavour. These quantitative analysts or “quants” are paid mouth-watering amounts by these institutions to create code that uses algorithms to scan the markets and gather data to make high level investment decisions. 

## Origin

The company founded in 2020 and officially launched in August 2021, by Peter Bakker, Glenn Vanbavinckhove, Ph. D, Saskia Albers and Mike Cohen – who is no longer with the company. All members have an array of skills and experience in algorithmic methods, AI platforms and quantitative finance which came together to create Unhedged. On the 25th of November 2020, the company embarked on a pre-seed investment round which reached their modest goal of $550,000 AUD from four seperate investors. The company then received an undisclosed amount in a seed round from Canadian venture capital firm Loyal and investor Barry Winata from the 29th of March to the 15th of May 2021. Finally, on the 22nd of June 2021, before launch, the company finished an equity crowdfunding raise reaching $2.1 million AUD. Enthusiasm for the company was seen when the minimum $350,000 AUD capital raise amount was surpassed in 45 minutes.  

## Business activities

At its core, Unhedged is an investment platform for individuals that uses AI and machine learning to invest your money.  From the Unhedged website, “We want to liberate investment secrets that were once only accessible to super-rich” – the crux of Unhedged’s philosophy. The company aims to pull back the curtain of secrecy and confusion that retail investors continually face. It also turns traditional wealth management on its head. Wealth managers will place money in static portfolios that usually have a specific annual return on investment benchmark. This “target” benchmark usually accounts and includes inflation and can hover in the ranges of 7-11% per annum. It does not matter how well your portfolio performs – the wealth managers still take their fees. Additionally, if your portfolio starts to perform poorly during your investment, wealth managers tend to be hesitant to move your positions around resulting in no gain, or extremely poor performances on your positions for your portfolio. 

Alternatively, Unhedged have developed algorithms that actively scan an estimated five million data points daily. Unhedged uses application software such as jQuery, which is used to simplify HTML, React, a JavaScript library that helps develop user interfaces, PHP, a general-purpose scripting language geared towards web development and Webflare which provides web security. The company then uses all these tools to develop algorithms that take the gathered data to make investment decisions based on the settings you make in your portfolio – nothing static about that. It is like having a supercomputer as a wealth manager that never sleeps, eats and checks the markets all day, every day. These factors contribute to Unhedged being a growing force in the wealth management industry. The average person will not have access nor understand the software programs previously mentioned, so Unhedged removes that incredibly high barrier to entry. This can be seen by the astonishing waitlist to be able to access Unhedged’s services. As the company is currently in its fifth month of operation and needs to careful manage onboarding, as of February 16th, 2021, there is a 1552 person wait list. Additionally, Unhedged has a simple and transparent fee structure. A 0.49% base management fee per year, and a “success fee” – only when your investment outperforms the market and hits an all-time high will this fee be deducted, which ranges from 0-1.61%. Therefore, that maximum fee deducted can be 2.1% per annum, which is alarmingly lower than wealth management firms. 

## Landscape

Unhedged operates within two sperate domains within the financial industry. The first is serving as an investment platform and the second is servicing as a wealth management platform. The biggest advancement to the wealth management space over the last five to ten years has undoubtedly been the development of robo-advisors. While there are many parallels between Unhedged and other robo-advisor platforms, what distinguishes Unhedged from its competition is the complexity and sophistication of their algorithms and machine leaning. Robo-advisors will be programmed to implement Modern Portfolio Theory, and offer typical industry buzzword portfolios “balanced”, “defensive” or “growth” etc. These portfolios follow the general industry standard and no matter who or what robo-advisor is used, all customers will end up owning the same shares, ETF’s or bonds. 

## Results

The algorithms are the investment portfolios Unhedged offer. However, they do not promote the portfolios as “defensive” or “balanced”, like most wealth managers do, rather they offer three algorithms as investment options. The algorithms are designed to have low correlation to each other, meaning combining one or more of the algorithms will reduce overall volatility. Each algorithm has an accompanying related benchmark to monitor performance. The first algorithm is the Momentum Algorithm which hypothesizes that movement is followed by more movement in the same direction. It’s as simple as that. Stocks tend to maintain recent price trends in the future, and the momentum strategy utilises this. Benchmarked against the SPDR S&P 500 ETF, since the beginning of 2010, the Momentum Algorithm has returned 475%, and the SPDR S&P 500 ETF returning 440%.

The second algorithm is Sector Rotation Algorithm and is based off Noble Prize winner Marcos Lopez de Prados research. The algorithm hypothesises that one should create clusters of stocks that behave the same therefore you should create clusters of similar stocks and if you weigh those clusters, then there is a more reliable risk reward scenario. The Sector Rotation Algorithm is benchmarked against the iShares Core Growth Allocation ETF, which since the beginning of 2010 has returned 230%, whereas the algorithm has returned 260%. The final Industrial Activity Algorithm is based on the correlation between metals prices and economic activity and the stress factors in the market. This indicator has a high correlation with US 10 Year Bond yields, and this correlation is used as a control to predict future mean reversions. It is once again benchmarked against the SDPR S&P 500 ETF, which has returned 440%, however the Industrial Activity Algorithm has returned an incredible 1100% since the beginning of 2010. 

While these are historical figures, and the algorithms have only been available to the public for the last few months, it shows that the developed algorithms are beating the market. As a customer this is an encouraging sign and would give confidence to use the Unhedged product. 

## Recommendations 

Unhedged is a company that has an incredible opportunity to become an industry leader in the wealth management space. They’re giving retail investors an unbelievable opportunity to use technologies that they will never comprehend or understand. The founders and current employees of the company are incredibly tech savvy, educated and have a mountain of industry experience and knowledge. Unhedged needs to accommodate the number of users that want to use their product. They must increase their capacity to avoid lengthy waitlists – which could result in their products not being used at all. Two suggestions are, giving end users every resource possible to solve the issues they may face and not just hiring tech talent, but human resource and marketing talent also. Understandably, Unhedged is its infancy of being a live product, however, the company should increase marketing and provide basic education to potential customers to help them further comprehend and apricate AI and machine learning. 

## Resources
- https://unhedged.com.au/
- https://unhedged.com.au/important-documents/PDS.pdf
- https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/unhedged/company_financials
- https://www.crunchbase.com/search/funding_rounds/field/organizations/last_funding_type/unhedged
- https://www.smartcompany.com.au/startupsmart/news/unhedged-1-7-million-equity-crowdfunding-democratising-share-trading/
- https://www.birchal.com/company/unhedged
- 
